Health advice made easy
Connect with a registered nurse day or night for free, secure and confidential health advice. Call 811.

When to call Health811
Please note:
If you require immediate medical attention, call 911.

For suspected poisoning, call the Ontario Poison Centre at 1-800-268-9017.

If you or someone you know is thinking about suicide, call 988. Help is available 24 hours a day, 7 days a week.

Health811 is a free, secure, and confidential service that is available 24 hours a day, 7 days a week. If you are in Ontario and have a non-urgent health concern or health-related question and you would like to speak to a live agent, simply call 811 or for TTY: 711 for the hearing impaired. You must have a TTY device to use this number.

If you use Bell Relay TTY Service, or Canada Video Relay Service (VRS), please contact their standard phone lines.

If you are calling from a remote community in northern Ontario and use a VoIP phone, please dial 1-866-797-0000.

You can call 811 for help with a variety of non-urgent symptoms, health information, and finding health-related services.

When you call 811, you will have the following options:

Learn more about any non-urgent medical symptoms

Speak with a registered nurse to help you find a doctor or nurse practitioner accepting new patients in your area

Seek health information

Receive advice on how to quit smoking

Speak with a registered dietitian

Request a Fecal Immunochemical Test (FIT) for colorectal cancer screening

Learn more about the Ontario Breast Screening Program (OBSP)

Obtain assistance with the Health811 website

Get help with Health811 if you are experiencing technical problems

You will be asked to select an option that best matches your needs. Once you make a selection, you will be connected to a live agent who can connect you with the appropriate services.

Using your preferred language
When you call Health811, the interactive service will ask you to select your preferred language beginning with the option to select English or French.

If you select French, you will be matched to a francophone Navigator Agent or registered nurse.

If you request a language other than English or French, you will be asked to stay on the line. You will be transferred to an agent who will be able to help you. Health811 provides on-demand access to a virtual translation service 24 hours a day, 7 days a week.

What to expect when speaking to a Registered Nurse
If you are calling for non-urgent health advice, a live agent will put you in touch with a registered nurse. The registered nurse can provide you with health care advice and recommendations based on your health symptoms. This might include treatment at home or a recommendation about which health care option would be the best, including:

Primary care physician

Walk-in Clinic

Virtual Urgent Care Clinic

Pharmacy

Emergency department if needed

If the registered nurse determines your situation requires immediate medical assistance, with your consent, they will initiate a call to 911 for you. They will stay on the call with you on your behalf as needed and conference you in to ensure that a 911 operator is able to provide you with further assistance.

How to get connected to Health811’s programs
After you have provided your information, you can tell the agent you want to learn more about Health811’s programs. Examples of Health811 programs include:

Finding a family doctor (Health Care Connect)

Speaking with a dietitian (Nutrition Counseling Program)

Help with breastfeeding (Enhanced Breastfeeding Support)

Help with quitting smoking (Smoking Cessation)

Questions about medically assisted dying (Medical Assistance in Dying (MAiD) Care Coordination Service)

Cancer screening (colorectal, breast, and others)

With your consent, the agent will then collect your information and arrange for a program representative to call you back at the number you have provided.

What to do if you miss a call-back
If all agents are busy on the line helping other patients, you will be offered an option to request a call-back. This means someone will call you back.

If you consent to a call-back, the automatic system will ask you to enter the best number an agent can call you back at.

If you do not answer a returned 811 call, and you have consented to Health811 leaving you a voicemail, you will receive a voicemail (1-866-797-0000 will appear on your caller ID).

Please note that if you do not consent to a call-back, you will need to call 811 again.

What to do if your call is being misdirected or 811 does not work
If your call is misdirected to a service that you did not request, speak to the Navigator Agent and they can redirect your call to the appropriate team.